if you think about approach and
avoidance I I sort of make a distinction
IM morality between two kinds of
morality one is prescriptive and one is
proscriptive prescriptive is based in
avoidance these are the things we
shouldn't do you shouldn't lie you
shouldn't steal you shouldn't cheat
right we all know that right but
proscriptive morality is about not doing
the wrong thing it's it's based in
inhibition constraint and so forth if
you look at liberals and conservatives
they don't differ in terms of how much
they think you should be helping or or
they may say you should help different
people but where you start seeing huge
differences is the group based
[Music]
morality hello everyone I'm talking
today with Dr Ronnie janof Bulman she's
a professor
amerita at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst
she's a social psychologist and the
author of two books one from about 30
years ago called shattered assumptions
and the other called the two moralities
the origin and fall of right and left
politics why did I want to talk to Dr
janof Bulman well I'm very interested in
both angles of her
work
first because the notion of shattered
assumptions is associated with the idea
that there's something like a hierarchy
of values in our beliefs in in the
structure of our beliefs that we have
some beliefs that are more fundamental
than others those would be beliefs that
many other beliefs depend upon and so I
wanted to talk to her about what it
might mean that the assumptions that
Orient Us in the world are organized
hierarchically right so that some things
are deep and other things peripheral and
so that the deep things are in some
sense the most real and vital all of
those topics we're going to talk about
in the discussion with Dr Ronnie janof
pman so I'm interested
in two your two major works I I want to
talk to you about shattered assumptions
and I want to talk to you about the
political divide and I think we'll start
with shattered assumptions and so um why
don't you start by letting everybody
who's watching and listening know know
what you were what you meant when you
discussed shattered assumptions and why
you felt that was a reasonable way of
approaching the problem of uh
traumatic traumatic injury
post-traumatic stress disorder right
profound
disillusionment even okay I mean that's
work that's now 30 years old I should
say that um but um I'm a social
psychologist not a clinical psychologist
um and I did a great deal of research on
um victimization back 30 and 40 years
ago and what I was finding um was some
commonality actually a great deal of
commonality across victimizations things
that we would Now call trauma rape
victims loss of loved ones early um
accident victims natural disaster
victims um and um at the time the
clinical literature really was somewhat
problematic from my perspective because
it was looking at people as pathological
as opposed to the situations as
pathological in some sense um and um I
kept hearing the same thing from people
uh across these domains which was um I
never thought it could happen to me
which was kind of surprising at the time
because you know we assume people know
bad things happen right um but
um it led me actually to do uh some work
in uh and further research and um I
posited this notion of shattered
assumptions based on a um sort of
people's ackn finding that what we now
know as implicit cognition at the time
there was no little no work really or
very little work on implicit cognition
but finding that basically people's
beliefs about these fundamental beliefs
about the world seem to have gotten
shattered that beliefs about the world
being meaningless meaningful
not random benevolent people being
worthy all of a sudden people really
question these very very basic beliefs
that they didn't even necessarily know
they had um and it led me to this notion
of shattered assumptions uh which now if
I wrote the book now would um be a
little easier to to uh claim because of
all we now know about implicit cognition
right these were implicit beliefs um and
um
the they these police actually were not
necessarily Illusions I mean they were
these sort of working models of the
world um a good enough world and um
after these negative events they they
did seem seem to get shattered people
had a sense of their own fragility their
creatureliness you know we have we're
we're humans and species with symbolic
systems and yet we're we're food for
worms you know that notion of fragility
Terror so forth and so on so so
basically I I was writing it in some
ways as a corrective to much that was
out there in these very distinct domains
so there would be a literature on rape
victims for example or literature on
natural disasters now I should say there
were wonderful people working at the
time clinicians who certainly um you
know knew certainly as much as I did and
probably lots more um but they had a
very different perspective social
psychology I think is a very healthy way
of viewing the world because it
normalizes as opposed to pathologizes
and that's where I was coming from I
don't know if that's sufficiently
responds to question yeah oh yeah yeah
well it's it's it's definitely a good
start okay so now you mentioned
something that I'll just get you to
clarify a bit you said that if you were
writing this book today with what we
know about implicit cognition that your
argument would be easier to justify so
just like flesh that out a bit before I
ask you some other question questions
well well the notion well the fact is
that now we have implicit beliefs that
people don't necessarily know they have
it's so it's easy to argue that when
something happens and the inner world
gets shattered that these very
fundamental beliefs now which which
really are at the base of our conceptual
World um can be impacted by real life
events even though we don't know we hold
them you see at the time yeah yeah see
at the time it that wasn't necessarily
clear people would say well we know what
we believe everybody knows what you know
you see um that's all I meant by that
Jordan yes okay okay okay good well that
that's I presume that's what you meant
okay so now let me run an idea by you
and you you tell me what you think about
this and see if it's in accordance with
what you believe so I've been trying to
think about this um in part
neurologically because I'm interested in
why anxiety and Terror might be
radically dis anxiety and Terror and
Pain radically disinhibited by the
shattering of belief and hope destroyed
at a fundamental level okay so now you
believe in something approximating a
fundamental level so so let me let let
me explain what I think that might mean
and then you tell me what you think
about that okay
so in the landscape of implicit
cognition there are hierarchical
dependencies there there are some
presumptions that we make they might be
implicit upon which many other
presumptions uh rest that's like that's
a good definition of fundamental here's
a here's a way of thinking about it um
imagine that you
track the citation count of a
scientist's
work well the
more if the discipline hasn't become
corrupt the more citations broadly
speaking that a given scientist has the
more their work is fundamental to the
field and the reason for that is because
much other work in that field depends on
those Publications otherwise they they
wouldn't be massively cited and so then
you could imagine that in
a system of belief there are levels of
dependency those levels of dependency
have a bedroom
Rock and at that Bedrock everything
rests that seem reasonable to you
absolutely absolutely okay good so let's
okay so let me go a little farther with
this and you tell me if you object to
any of this okay so I've come to
understand
that that implicit structure through
which we see the
world is equivalent to um a waiting
system it looks to me like it's
equivalent to the statistical weights
that large language models extract yeah
that makes sense to you too okay okay so
then we have to filter the world through
a system of Weights that's how we
prioritize our attention we have to
prioritize our attention because there's
too much information there's way too
much information there's way too many
possibilities so we prioritize and we do
so in keeping with our axiomatic
assumptions and they have a hierarchical
structure structure of dependency now if
something happens to us that violates
those
assumptions then it blows The Waiting
system it demolishes the waiting system
that we use to prioritize our attention
and everything comes flooding
back okay do you know Carl friston's
work by any chance uh not well so okay
okay well this is an exciting thing
so Carl friston has a model of
perception that's very welldeveloped and
he's a very well-sited neuroscientist he
invented most of the what would you call
it the procedures that people use to
investigate MRI images for example right
okay so FR friston's a very
wellestablished
neuroscientist and
he believes that both anxiety and
positive emotion are related to entropy
control so this is different than Terror
management it's a way diff it's a very
different idea although they're
analogous in some sense okay
so anxiety signals the collapse of a
system of
orientation so that hierarchical waiting
is no longer possible so that way too
many things impinge upon you at once and
anxiety is actually the signal that that
happens technically it's the signal that
that's happening and so it's the
flooding back of chaos right and that
enough okay now the consequence of this
we know the psychophysiological
consequences of this the
psychophysiological consequences are
accelerated an acceleration of the
stress response right exactly hyper
preparation on the psychophysiological
side right and that is sufficiently
stressful to be physiologically and
neurologically damaging
right the hyper hypervigilance that
comes with uh trauma is clearly uh
consistent with that the thing I would
is the thing I say that's interesting is
one doesn't even need to P I mean
obviously there is a waiting system and
you know the accuracy at the top very
top levels is absolutely essential and
at the fundamental levels at some level
you can have some elusory beliefs
because I mean if it's very dangerous I
believe I can swim and I'm a great
swimmer but I go into a pool and I can't
swim I'm in trouble if I think the world
is is sort of more benevolent than it
really is that's not going to get me you
know that's that's really a fundamental
belief that's not going to get me into
as much trouble but can guide me in a
positive way okay one of one of the
things I was going to say is I'm not
sure you need to even posit The Waiting
system in the case of trauma because I
think what although I don't think we
would disagree about this what is being
shattered and disrupted is the base of
the of the fundamental of the system the
conceptual Bedrock of the system that
that shattered and the anxiety is really
a double duty anxiety first of
all understand living in a world that
does seem more dangerous all of a sudden
when you've been sort of horrible things
have happened to you right there's this
real world phenomenon and on top of that
you have lost the guideposts to survive
it right the conceptual system that
orients you as you would say fistance
work would talk about so you've kind of
so you now have this double this anxiety
that's quite remarkable that leads to a
really a sense of Terror it's not well
well there's there's two things that
happen in friston's conceptualization
and I wrote a paper about this with some
students of mine too when we were trying
to tie anxiety to entropy it's not only
that anxiety mounts that's bad that's
terrible right and it it does result in
this state of psychophysiological hyper
preparation which is physiologically
devastating across time right it can
cause brain damage it can it can make
you it does in fact make you old
because you're burning up excess
resources the other thing that happens
though is that it destroys hope and
that's also an entropy problem so
priston characterized positive emotion
as a signal that entropy in relationship
to a valued goal had decreased so so
imagine that you you you posit something
of value and then you move towards it
and you see yourself moving towards it
and that's happening validly then the
the dimunition of the distance between
you and the goal is signaled by dopamine
release and it shows that it shows that
the probability that you're going to
attain that goal is increasing and
that's what hope is now if you blow out
your value structure if it's blow T
pulled out from underneath you because
your assumptions are shattered then your
conceptualization of or even your belief
in the possibility of a valid goal also
vanishes so not only are you subsumed by
anxiety you're overwhelmed by
hopelessness yes no there's no question
I mean and I I talk about that actually
in the book but I don't talk I I only
have a few pages on the
neurophysiology of of um trauma because
you you have to remember it was
published 30 years ago so research was
35 40 years we have learned or trauma
researchers and I haven't by the way
done research on trauma for many years
but trauma researchers have learned a
great deal as you're pointing out about
some of the physiological neuros
pychological bases of or or
ramifications of and consequences of of
of trauma um which is not something that
um you know that long ago we knew much
about it is interesting though that from
social psychology we do think about
emotions as signals I mean you don't you
don't even have to posit the the physi
physiology or Neuroscience you can say
you know the your emotions are sort of
the experiential automatic signals about
how you're operating in the world yeah
they're navigation guides yeah yeah
navigation gues so which very similar
but we're talking about at different
levels of analysis there yes yeah okay
so now let let's let's go to the idea of
of the shattering so um there's
something else I want to weave in
so imagine that you have an aim and that
it's predicated on on a set of
values now imagine that those values
have a hierarchical structure in the way
that we just described so there's
something at the bottom now that the
question is how would you
characterize that structure so I have a
hypothesis for you and you can tell me
what you think about this I it's a
hypothesis that I've developed fairly
extensively but I'm working
on in detail in in the new book that I'm
working on right now called we who
wrestle with gold
so I think
that the that a description of the
structure through which we look at the
world the hierarchy of values through
which we look at the world I think
that's literally what a story
is see a story so okay so so a story
look if you go to a movie and you watch
the protagonist hero or
villain here's what you'll see you'll
see a a sequence of
situations in which the aim of the
character is Port becomes
clear right now when you watch that what
happens is that you infer his aim and
you adopt that you embody that this is
literally how you understand it you
embody it you come to see the world
through that perspective and you
experience the emotions that are part
and parcel of that aim right so that's a
form of exploration right because it
means you can go to a movie or you can
watch piece of fiction you can adopt a
temporary aim it's like a game you can
adopt a temporary aim and in consequence
you can explore the consequences of that
aim but also have the experience that
goes along with it it's the same thing
that people are doing by the way when
they go to a sports stadium and they and
they watch someone aiming at the goal
right and being skillful in their
approach right they adopt the aim which
is the goal that's why they identify
with the team and then they embody the
emotions that
are appropriate to that aim okay so so I
think this is I think this is a
fundamental say I figured this out in
part 30 years ago when I was looking at
the neuros pychology of expectation
right there's a big cognitive psychology
litery on
expectation is all all about it right
right right but but there's something
there's something about that that's
wrong because we don't expect in the
world we
desire we desire right our expectations
are specified by our desires and that's
a useful twist because it brings in it
integrates motivation see if it's cold
cognitive expectation we're prediction
machines but we're not we're motivated
machines we're pursuing our desires and
so right our aims are motivated right
right and so we're upset when the
outcome doesn't match our desire not
when the outcome doesn't match our
expectation that's very interesting I um
I guess I agree in part I do think that
I mean there's such a huge literature
and psychology on expectation that
doesn't necess let's let's assume you're
responding to somebody on the basis of a
stereotype for example you're responding
based on expectation you generally
operate to confirm it but I'm not sure
that's based on a desire so I'm not sure
all of it is motivated I think some of
it is some much is motivated I agree
with you but I think much is there is a
great deal that's not motivated cogn
cognition the the bulk of our human
functioning is but okay well so I think
I think we can solve that conundrum
given the framework we're already using
so imagine that we're seeing the world
through a a hierarchy of value right
with something okay the farther down the
Assumption hierarchy you go towards the
base the more motivation is in involved
if you're just playing on the periphery
where things don't matter then it's
expectation but if you go down Into the
Depths then it starts to become highly
motivated and that's that's BEC part of
that motivation is the fact that as you
go down into the depths the world like
your stability depends on
the what on what you desire making
itself
manifest or at least not being radically
violated right right that's right your
stability depends on your working models
actually working right um and and I do
agree uh you know you know it's
interesting we talk about motivation
because when I was doing the two
moralities book of course all of that is
funneled right through motivation I mean
the the two fun the fundamental Notions
of approach and avoidance I mean that is
really how we organize our lives right I
believe in motivation believe for sure
okay okay okay so
so are you or someone you know fighting
the battle against cancer for the last
25 years invita medical centers have
been pioneering personalized cuttingedge
treatment programs for patients all over
the world invita has been the leader for
patients looking for advanced
immunotherapy and gentically targeted
therapies all while focusing on fewer
side effects and better patient outcomes
as a global leader in oncology care
invita is committed to healthcare
freedom for all they've spearheaded a
revolution in employer health insurance
options empowering companies to provide
their employees with access to not only
Top Doctors Hospitals and Technologies
but also the first ofit kind Nationwide
personalized medicine coverage invita is
doing all of this plus offering
significant tax and cost savings full
transparency and Liberation from the
grip of commercial insurance carriers
whether you're a patient in need or a
company looking to break free of
monopolized healthcare insurance invita
could have the solution for you to learn
more about their treatment options visit
inv vita.com or visit invita health.com
to learn more about their company
insurance programs that's invita spelled
nv.com for treatment options or inv
vitah health.com to learn more about
their company insurance programs
so the expectation model came out
of uh the cognitive and the
neurophysiological
literature of the early 60s and and it
came out of cybernetic modeling and it
came out of neuros pychological modeling
and early cognitive science and the
notion there again as I said was that
people were rather cold prediction
machines expectation
machines that's where the notion of
something like working model came from
but I believe that there's there's a
serious flaw that the fact that that
doesn't incorporate motivation the fact
that it's expectation rather than desire
is it it does two things it's a
fundamental flaw because it takes
motivation out of the picture and that's
a big problem because like we're highly
motivated and the second thing it does
is it obscures the fact that what we're
not modeling we're telling a story those
aren't the same thing and this is okay
okay now was going to say I agree in
part I just wouldn't um paint the entire
picture with that way I do think there
there much there is much where we are
not you know some so many things are
operating without our awareness okay and
I'm not I'm not talking about fraudi and
you know unconscious we have automatic
you know mind time you know system one
system two kinds of operations so much
of that um it won't necessarily it it is
automatic now you can still say that
automaticity der from a system that's
fundamentally motivated okay but I do
think I do think in its operation
there's a kind of automaticity to so
much that we do that so much you know
that that at least um you know I don't
have any problem saying it's consistent
with a motivational model but I feel
like that that in fact as it operates it
does it does look like fure cognition in
many cases and that we're just we're
confirming expectations because that um
because that's how we can operate in the
world you know and that's that is
motivation okay so let me take that a
little part a bit because I'm going to
reformulate it and I'll tell you why and
I'll tell you why I think that's in
keeping with your theory
so confirming in
expectation um no testing our
fundamental narrative
hypothesis and why because we want to
make sure that the foundation is
remaining
intact is that automatic it's automatic
until the assumptions are shattered and
then automaticity dis well EXA so that's
the thing so that's the that's the key
that shows you that even the
automaticity is dependent on the
Integrity of the model that's motivated
right so AOA within the Assumption it's
automatic within the maintained
assumption but the story is invalidated
when the is okay so so let me tell you
let me tell you a story and you tell me
what you think about this because I
think this is a story it's a fundamental
story and it's gerine to your hypothesis
I want to put forward the hypothesis
that the framework of meaning that's
shattered in the case of trauma is a
it's a naive framework now it might be
licit it's a naive form of faith and we
know that naivity is a risk factor for
trauma because we know that people who
are dependent are more likely to be
traumatized so okay so so here's here's
the naivity element of it I I want to
tell you I want to bring in a
fundamental story since I think these
assumption networks are stories okay so
I've been studying the story of Joe
and story of job is the story of
suffering yes and meaningless right what
seems like random events right well or
worse than random malevolent malevolent
right so so worse than random okay so
this is how the story sets itself up so
we're told at the beginning of the story
that job is a good man and so and we
have the testimony of God himself on on
job's account and so God is up in heaven
um bragging away so to speak about how
good job is and his sons come to observe
and one of whom is Satan and Satan says
I don't think job's that good I think
he's just fortunate and God says no I
think he's good and Satan says why don't
you let me have a crack at him and we'll
see if he's good and so God says yeah
okay have do your
worst and in consequence and that's the
malevolent element let's say at least
the arbitrary element but perhaps the
malevolent element job loses everything
that he's worked for virtually
everything he works for he loses much of
his family he's uh he's he becomes very
ill and not just ill but in ill in a way
that's disfiguring and shameful and then
his friends come along his friends and
tell him that well you know if he had
been a better guy none of this would
have happened so really it's his fault
and then job job has a response and this
is why I'm bringing up this story job's
response is to insist that despite
proximal
evidence it's a
requirement to maintain faith in the
essential goodness of the individual
especially an individual who's been
conducting himself ethically which job
has been by his own testimony by God's
testimony we know job is a good man and
job job's wife tells him when she
observes his suffering she says there's
nothing left for you to do but shake
your fist at God curse him and die and
job says instead and he insists this to
his friends he refuses to lose faith in
his essential goodness and he also
refuses to lose faith in the essential
goodness of God and there's something
it's something like this this is what's
relevant to the shattered assumptions
notion is
that in order to stabilize the structure
through which you view the world it is
necessary to adopt as axiomatic the
notion that whatever happens to you if
you conduct yourself ethically is the
best thing that could happen regardless
of the proximal evidence and also it's
necessary for you not to lose faith in
the essential goodness of being itself
and those are those are religious
proclamations right they're
proclamations of a kind of religious
Faith right right well and and it seems
to me too and tall and tall orders at
that right oh God the the yes the
tallest in fact the
tallest exactly well it's interesting a
because the Book of Job is one of the
books that really sets the stage in the
biblical Corpus for the story of the
crucifixion right because the
crucifixion story is the story of Job
expanded even more
thoroughly right now these shattered
assumptions that you
describe they they seem to me to be
identical to axioms of Faith
conceptually
speaking right they're a prior
commitments except yes at some level
except you know they developed you know
the the way we think we should need to
think about them is he developed from
early infancy from childhood I these are
they're based in you know it's not like
somebody's taking a leap of faith faith
is based on you know you don't need sort
of um there validity in the world is
irrelevant do you know that's what faith
is about right um You Don't things don't
have to there's no proof right um it's
it's it's it's it you take it a leap an
Act of Faith these are fundamental
beliefs based on experience they're not
they're not just you know sort of
in the sky they're not things that you
know I I I want to believe that these
are not desires they're based on let's
say the infant who is getting good
enough parenting not great parent good
enough parenting realizes the world is
predictable the child cries the mother
the father come and help the world
becomes meaningful becomes benevolent
you know it's good world I'm getting fed
I must be worth something I mean these
are very you know
rudimentary kind of beliefs but it
starts there and and it builds and you
know what comes first obvious viously
gets confirmed um I do think though you
were calling them naive at one level
it's what allows us to wake up in the
morning and approach the day okay yeah
assuming our assumptions haven't been
shattered they haven't been shattered
that's right but even if they have been
shattered the the the the what we what
um is also important to recognize is
people that started with these positive
assumptions actually do better in coping
with the shattered beliefs because they
actually have something to kind of move
back to okay if you start with very
negative beliefs about the world if you
start with you know you are going to be
more prone to possibly the a realistic
view of the world being bad if that's
what you know uh when bad things do
happen in the world right to good people
right bad things happen to good people
um then nevertheless you are going to be
more prone to depression and anxiety
just you know living in the world is
harder so some of these are what seem
seem like auser beliefs are you know are
what allow us to be you talked about
motivation it allows us to get be
motivated on a daily basis to function
and operate and you know love and care
and you know so I do think and and they
have
long-term um consequences when bad
things happen because what happens if
after the shattering is people try to
rebuild these assumptions in the best
cases and by the way most cases not the
cases that all go to psychologist and
whatever if you if you did huge
Community surveys which we did you find
lots of people have gone through some
really horrible things and don't
necessarily go to a clinician you know
now everybody goes to clinicians 30 40
years ago that wasn't the case um people
people coped they did well know they had
people who cared around them they their
own um sort of internal worlds allow
them to to TI of deal one thing that I
found that was fascinating for example
is said
self-blame was remarkably common after
all of these things even when I I I was
I I I did some work with um people who
are paraplegics or quadriplegics from
being shot randomly on the street or um
just um you Rand truly random events you
and I would unquestionably call random
when as a for for the victim and um this
would still engage in some self-blame
now why it's it's not and by the way the
only literature that talked about self
lame were rape victims because everybody
was blaming the women anyway right which
was just because victims blame
themselves doesn't mean they're
blameworthy okay so why why blame why
engage in this in in you know in ways
that seem inappropriate given the true
situation it's because that allowed
people to get some sense of control to
start believing the world isn't random
to start believing the world is not as
bad as they thought taking some of the
blame on themselves now the sad part of
that is of course other people could
then blame them more if they were
blaming themselves when that is not
appropriate or legitimate but what we do
in terms of our own coping I think is
really kind of fascinating and that was
something that was surprising to me
seeing all this self-blame but there are
lots of other ways people cop you know
um they think of worse cases um but
people would you know sort of try to
rebuild assumptions of course initially
there's a lot of numbing and people
can't kind of deal with the situation
but over time you get all the intrusive
thoughts right not the denial but the
intrusive thoughts when you're ready to
work on it and our brains our our our
our human species systems are remarkable
at working on things that need to be
solved even when we're not consciously
doing it right and over time what I
found is people did remarkably well that
doesn't mean they they never returned to
the same as you would say naive
assumptions but they turned to more
positive assumptions about the world and
were sadder but wiser and now felt that
they could could basically incorporate
the negative events in a broader sort of
belief system that was still
fundamentally positive right okay okay
so let's Okay so let's take a bunch of
that apart the
first issue I'd like to address there is
probably
the notion of
Illusion
so I spent a lot of time looking at
Shelly Taylor's work the necessity of
positive illusion yeah well I I am I am
not a fan of the idea of positive
Illusions in the least I think it's I
think it's one of the most dangerous
philosophical ideas ever put forward by
academics that okay and I I know it's
aligned with Terror management Theory
too that we need to that we need to
inhabit a world of some like necessary
Fiction it's predicated on the idea that
reality itself is so unbearable that if
we ever saw it in its unvarnished form
it would demolish us no I'm not I'm not
there either okay okay so so so a
better model perhaps go back yeah go
ahead go ahead no I was going to say one
thing is you were talking about the
hierarchy of belief earlier go back to
that elusory beliefs at the very
fundamental level which allow you to
have some positive motivation getting up
in the morning dealing with life and so
those actually could be very good
they're very strong positive motivation
to move ahead to go to to act in the
world you don't want illusions at the
higher levels right you can't if you do
you're G to you actually will not be
able to deal with the real real world as
I was bringing up before if I have an
illusion about what a good swimmer I am
and I jump into a pool and I can't swim
that's pretty damn unfortunate right so
I do think you know shelle and others
didn't make this distinction about using
hierarchy but go back to the to the what
you were talking about earlier if you
incorporate it into a hierarchical
system illusions at the bottom could be
wonderfully and positively motivating As
you move up they're very very dangerous
right okay so so let's let's focus on
that because I don't think that the re
proper replacement for a naive optimism
is a functional illusion because I don't
think that
the
the retooling produces an illusion so
let me explain
why if you are dealing with people with
an anxiety
disorder you can have them organize a
hierarchy of fear things they'll avoid
right and then you can take you can get
them to rank order the severity of that
fear and then you can get them to start
working on let's say the least severe
fear and you can start to expose them to
that right you can have them imagine
them being in that situation or start
acting it out
now that exposure is predicated on the
idea that if they face what plagues them
they'll
Prevail and that's a faith in learning
itself because we learn on the edge
everything we learn is on the edge
everything we learn is in consequence of
some minor confrontation with something
we don't understand some minor retooling
of our assumptions and some growth okay
right go go back to assimilation
accommodation right exact exactly you do
that you do that in a certain with a
certain degree of tre trepidation and
excitement right you learn when you need
to accommodate and assim right right
right okay so here's a fundamental
assumption that's not
auser if if you face the
world forthrightly and
voluntarily with faith in your ability
to
Prevail the pathway forward will make
itself known to you in the best manner
possible it's the Axiom of learning
itself it's what we facilitate in our
children
and you can make an assumption that it's
it's not unreasonable to make the
assumption that the cosmos itself is
established on that principle and I mean
that in that deep sense so the terror
management theorist characters right
deriving their theories from Ernest
Becker I love Ernest Becker's
book but he's also deeply wrong the hero
myth that Becker lays out is not an
illusion it's actually the fundamental
principle by which adaptation takes
place because con confronting so
confronting a sequence of minor no
confronting a sequence of minor traumas
let's say is exactly what fortifies you
right it's the principle of medicine
itself a little bit of the poison is
what strengthens you and it's also but
it's also the nature of learning and so
to have faith in that capacity above all
is not elus Y in fact it's faith in the
fundamental mechanism by which people
formulate their adaptation and that's
see Becker Becker there was a whole
literature that Becker didn't know of a
that he didn't pay any attention to and
so he went he went astray in his
fundamental presumptions and so did the
terror management theorists in con You'
got to say you've got to believe also
that not everything works on faith I
mean there if if you know the fact that
you can't swim I'm going to go back to
this example again and you jump in the
water order because you think you can do
it you you know faith is not going to is
not going to allow you to survive okay
stupid yeah well that's stupidity but
that's what you're saying but but it
sounds like stupidity but that's what
you're saying I mean the fact is we I I
think you know it's all a matter of
opinion but I think we learn by being
exposed to situations that are new that
we are able to assimilate if it is too
different different you know assimilate
or we you know we're can ass imated
because it works or we can accommodate
our structures to basically incorporate
it if there is too much of a disconnect
it doesn't it can't happen and right
because we don't we don't know how to
manage trauma that's right in trauma in
trauma the disconnect is at the Bedrock
level whereas in much daily life the
disconnect you know I don't want to talk
about small traumas it's sort of
interesting Jordan that um the word
trauma gets so overused now right you
know I get a call from a podcaster in
England that wants me to give to talk
about the all the people being
traumatized by the Queen's death this is
an old woman that you could expect would
die you know that's really I don't call
that trauma right right and you probably
wouldn't either we we now live in a
world where the word has gotten so
overused that I feel it's it it it
demeans it in a way that people who
really are traumatized and go through
your trauma um you know sort of aren't
being recognized so what they have of
course it's careless it's very careless
okay so let's go back to the notion of
assimilation and
accommodation are you tired of feeling
sluggish rund down or just not your best
self take control of your health and
vitality with balance of nature balance
of nature fruit and veggie capsules are
the most convenient way to ensure you're
getting your daily intake of fruits and
vegetables balance of nature uses an
advanced cold vacuum process that
encapsulates fruits and vegetables into
Whole Food supplements without
sacrificing their natural antioxidants
the capsules are completely void of
additives fillers extracts synthetics
pesticides or added sugar the only thing
in balance of nature fruit and veggie
capsules are fruits and veggies you need
nutrients to function at your best each
and every day and balance of nature
helps you do just that go to balance of
nature.com and use promo code Jordan to
get 35% off your first fruit and veggie
set and an additional $10 off every
additional set you buy that's balance of
nature.com promo code
Jordan okay so I want to put a
neurological spin on that in
relationship to what we're discussing
okay so okay so you said and rightly so
you said that we can bite off more than
we can chew and we can neither
assimilate nor accommodate we can't we
can't digest and we can't adjust
ourselves because the the mouthful was
too big right we've taken on okay Cheng
is too great okay so so here's something
you tell me what you think about this
because I think this is like the coolest
idea ever
so we're attracted towards optimal
challenge by the sense of meaning it
grips us okay so instinct is the no
meaning is the Instinct that puts us on
the edge of optimal
change okay if we talk about meaning as
assimilation yes yes okay well well I
would say meaning meaning is the
motivation that puts us on that edge
okay right and it's something like okay
so now it grips our attention mhh right
it activates positive emotion
MH MH right and it it it does something
like optimize anxiety because zero
anxiety isn't the right amount you want
to be on you want to be a little Ed on
edge yeah a little bit optimally
optimally right just like you are when
you're preparing to play a game with an
optimal opponent right there's a
challenge okay meaning curve meaning
signifies the presence of an optimized
challenge okay and that and and that
meaning that's not the illusory
consequence of a delusional belief
designed to protect us from the anxiety
of death instead that meaning is a
signal that we're on the developmental
Edge that will best prepare us for all
challenges that we might confront in the
future that's fine yes okay okay but
that all right but that so in a hero
story back to Becker in a hero Story the
hero takes on something like a maximal
challenge now Becker claimed that we
identify with those heroes in an
illusory manner to fortify ourselves
against the anxiety of death sort of
narcissistically elevating ourselves but
but the the alternative view is that no
as
a proper Sojourner forward what we're
doing is taking on exactly the optimized
challenge that expands our skill that
expands our knowledge that retools our
maps and that makes us optimally
prepared when all for the future even if
all hell breaks loose that seems
reasonable to you I I I mean I don't
think we go through I don't think all
these things we do in life is based on
trying to deny death which is of course
Becca's notion so I do agree with you I
mean there is this sense of yes the
challenge we like the Hero Stories we
learn from them we kind of it life is
not simply on a daily basis about
denying death there's no point that we
do I mean I think we frequently do deny
death but it is not the essence of
motivation which of course is what he
would
claim I'm so disagreeing with you that
we that the challenge is extremely
important in terms of moving forward
both as individuals and as species you
know so I don't disagree at all okay
well and the the model that I talked
about earlier the friston model the
model that I worked on with my students
as well the entropy control model it's
also
an interesting and compelling
alternative to the death anxiety model
because the fundamental enemy in the
entropy model isn't death per se death
is a consequence of unconstrained
entropy too many things going wrong at
once do you in right and so we're trying
to constrain and regulate the chaos of
our lives and we do that the question is
how we do that well we can do that with
auser and naive beliefs but they're
subject to shattering or we can do that
see so let let me offer you let me tell
you I I I think the key to shattering is
not that they're auser it's that they're
Bedrock that that the that's the that's
the the shattering of illusions at the
upper level wouldn't matter I mean that
would be very very unfortunate for
dealing with everyday life but it
wouldn't shatter our assumptions I mean
that that you know right well I meant
that they were a Los the only reason I
meant that they were a losery is because
they're susceptible to
shattering under dire circumstances
right that's all I meant that's right no
yeah absolutely absolutely and they are
to some extent blery because they're
they tend to be positive right well they
tend to be naively positive naely
positive naive okay so so let me tell
you another story this is a cool story
so so there's a story at the end of The
Exodus
adventure and
the reason I'm bringing these stories up
is because I believe that the Assumption
structure that we see the world through
is a story and so I'm looking at the
bottom of stories at the most
fundamental stories okay why is are
narratives I mean there's a very good
there there's there's no question all Li
are narratives right right right right
yeah the question that's well and that's
that's a hell of a thing to say because
it it it it begs the question you know
is life itself a narrative and that begs
the question of whether reality itself
is best construed as a narrative it
seems to me that it's highly likely yeah
well okay yeah I meant we live our lives
as narratives when something doesn't fit
we have to make the plot work right
right so the Exodus story yes the ex
story okay so yeah so there's a there's
a there's an event that occurs at the
end it's quite it's a remarkable story
so the Israelites are theyve made it
most of the way through the desert and
they're but they're still bitching and
whining and complaining they they're
longing for the previous tyranny right
so that's the previous set of
assumptions they don't like to be lost
which is where they are in the desert
when they're assumptions are
shattered yeah right that's exactly
right the desert that desert sojourn is
the shattered assumptions that are a
consequence of leaving the tyan
tyrannical State it's exactly what that
repres I mean I I might not say they
were traumatized I would say that they
are but they are very anxious
nevertheless go ahead they're lost
they're lost that's right turn to mes
and Aaron and yes okay right right
they're lost and they're out of water in
this scene okay and they get all
about this they're sick of eating the
food that they have and they're lost and
they're hopeless and they're longing for
tyranny and uh God gets tired of their
complaining their faithlessness let's
say their their their Rebellion against
movement forward and he sends a bunch of
poisonous snakes in to bite them
and
so the Israelites get bitten by all
these poisonous snakes and they get kind
of sick of it after a while and they go
ask Moses who they know to have a
connection with God to intercede
and Moses agrees and he goes and has a
chat with God and and then what should
happen is that God calls off the poison
the snakes and the Israelites move
forward but that's not what
happens and what happens instead is
insanely
profound and you know that healing
symbol of the Physicians that's a staff
with a serpent around it okay so this is
one of the variants of that symbol okay
so God tells
Moses take the bronze of the Israelites
and cast a staff so that's like the rod
of tradition that's like the fundamental
axiomatic
assumption put that in the ground and on
that put a bronze serpent
and have all the Israelites look at
this and if they look at it then the
poison won't affect them anymore now
this is a very interesting it's very
interesting he because God could just
call off the snakes but what but that
isn't what he does he fortifies the
Israelites against poison and he does
that by voluntary
exposure right okay like a verion
therapy right precisely like that
precisely like that and that's you know
that's that is the therapeutic approach
that approach of exposure that every
single psychotherapeutic school has
converged on in the last 100 years
doesn't matter with the origin the
psychoanalyst the cognitive psychologist
the behaviorists the existentialists
they all come to the same conclusion get
your story straight and confront what
challenges you that's the pathway to
Redemption okay so here's a cool Twist
on that story this is and this has to do
with what beliefs are fundamental at the
core not illusory in the gospels Christ
says to his followers that unless he is
lifted up like the serpent in the desert
there is no possibility of
redemption now this is a very weird
narrative twist because first of all it
begs a variety of questions the first
question being why in the world would
Christ refer back to that story the
second question being why would he
assimilate him himself to that figure
it's very unlikely right a serpent on a
pole okay so so this is the conclusion
and this has to do with the validity of
beliefs I believe and it's the antidote
to the notion that we need illusion to
survive
so a snake is a pretty bad thing and a
poisonous snake is worse and a poisonous
snake in the midst of a desert is even
worse but it's not the worst thing
what's the worst
thing that would be like a meta snake
what's the worst possible thing well the
worst possible thing is some something
like an amalgam of the tragedies of life
you could throw some malevolence in
there just for spice right so the worst
possible thing is the core of mortality
and the fact of
malevolence all right it's the full
confrontation with that that's
Illustrated in the gospel
narrative and so no yeah okay well I'll
just close with that and then I'll let
you respond the the idea there it's
something like this the idea there is
that faith in your ability faith in the
human ability to fully confront the
limits of mortal experience and
malevolence is the proper foundational
Axiom and it allows for the it allows
for the existence of evil right okay so
that's right yeah yeah no I'm totally I
mean
so you know the that's right you're
saying essentially that these these
illusory or as you're saying naive
beliefs at the fundamental level allow
us to function in the real world that's
right I mean I mean that's a very this
is a very mundane way and and simplistic
way of saying what you've been talking
about but one of the things I do want to
bring up is when we're talking about
sort of things that are illusory um in
part they're illusory because they're
overgeneralizations okay if say the
world is benevolent um you you have
these beliefs part of it is just it's an
O overgeneralization of in general
things are right it doesn't take into
account all the you know all the bad
stuff that we know know happen but so at
the fundamental level what we're talking
about these overgeneralized beliefs when
people actually end up managing and
coping successfully with trauma they
still end up having some beliefs that
are essentially less overgeneralized
they their beliefs that are positive
that now can account for as you're
saying the these negative events okay um
but but but it's but it's interesting to
talk about that cognitively we cannot as
as you know all too well you know we all
we cannot actually sort of respond to
every single little thing in the world
most of our beliefs and all of our
knowledge involves some over estimation
over generalization over abstra you know
and when you get to that very top of
that hierarchy then you may be the
things may be very very specific right
but the further down we move the greater
the general the
generalizations well and you're pointing
out that I don't think there's any
difference between noting the
undifferentiated and overgeneralized
quality of those initial beliefs and
naivity that's the same thing it's it's
the use of a it's a use of an
insufficiently detailed map so the map
the map that the or a or or a too
optimistic and naive story so the
problem with the belief structure that's
a minimal to disruption by trauma is
that it doesn't take into account the
existence let's say of tragic Randomness
and outright malevolence right and so
and that works fine until you encounter
it but it doesn't work at all once you
do and once you encounter it having
those beliefs actually enables people to
actually rebuild the assumptions and you
know the the only problem I have with
the word naive and and even though it's
I think sort of accurate is there is a
kind of um almost person blaming victim
blaming about V you know so naive T
feels like um s sort of pejorative do
you know what I'm saying as opposed to
if we use the cognitive word over
generalization instead it doesn't feel
quite so negative but but yes in terms
of but as a descriptor I think you're
right it's naive that's right right you
know okay well so that's that's
interesting too because there this is an
ancient argument right that that the
difference between let's say ignorance
and willful blindness right right and
you can imagine that
someone okay so let God let me let me
tell you a story about that so okay but
we will move to the other book sometime
we will right I really need to know what
you want what you think about it yeah
yeah we'll do that we'll do that we'll
do that right away maybe we'll just
close with this this part with this
Freud talked a lot about the edle
relationship that was characterized
by an overbearing maternal presence and
too much dependence right now we know
that people with dependent personality
are more likely to be traumatized now
but let me elaborate on that I'm I I I'm
I'm not sure that's but okay we we'd
have to deal with that's a whole
different discussion because um that
you're traumatized if you if you
experience
basically um sort of unusual out of the
ordinary events right that that super
challenge you but people who have the
most people that already have negative
assumptions actually often traumatized
less I don't think the ne right I don't
think the negative assumptions are a
sign of more differentiated worldview
right I'm not a fan of the
notion could be part it also could be
part of dependence you know dependent
people but um but anyway go ahead I'm
I'm sorry I apologize for interrup well
that well let let's see if I could lay
this out
properly
people people main maintain people
maintain their undifferentiated
viewpoints longer than they might
because when they're faced with minor
incidences
of of uh
disconfirming evidence they turn away
they they don't process it right that's
blind well but here's no not sure it's
willful blindness let's say that is
cognitive conservatism if we changed our
cognitive schemas every time there was
something that didn't fit it would be a
problem right I mean um things have to
things have to build up to change and
that's what like you know look at
scientific revolutions look at and
stuff you know the notion that we're not
going to make a change every second
based on one disconfirming stuff I mean
I actually love call popper you know the
notion is we should be cognitively
conservative when it comes to our
schemas or our theories it should take a
lot to turn them around but we should
ultimately but we should ultimately be
willing to turn them right that would be
dependent on the degree of their
axiomatic fundamental fundamental yes
exactly so the notion should be
that the deeper you go into the
axiomatic structure the farther down you
go the more absolutely overwhelming the
evidence has to be in order to move that
assumption yes absolutely agree okay
okay and so so I think the cognitive
conservatism that's that's that's
something like the that's the stake in
the ground right that's the that's the
Bedrock of something like tradition or
or cumulative experience yeah you can't
let one deviation at at the periphery
destroy the center right that's a
catastrophic mistake but
but so but it isn't only that people are
unwilling to change their Central
beliefs because they're cognitively
conservative they're
also prone to turning a blind eye even
to repetitive information that indicates
that there's an axiomatic error right no
I look I mean I mean we could talk about
politics now how we turn our you
know no I was going to say just segueing
the confirmation bias the you know we
only want to listen to things on our
side we don't want to actually be
exposed to the other we we kind of live
in our silos we confirm what we believe
I mean this is part of uh part of how we
live our lives unfortunately right um
yes I totally agree you know the the
fact that we want to confirm what we
already believe and expose ourselves to
stuff that will confirm it is
a very a major part of how we construct
and live our lives right right and
that's not that's not well you tell me
what you think about this that's not
merely cognitive conservatism that's
also active away from okay that's I that
goes back to what you were saying
earlier that's motivational right right
that that's part of desire right well
why first of all you know if we've
organized ourselves politically we have
somewhere convenient to put malevolence
and it's not within us it's in the oppos
of our ideological belief so that's a
lovely thing to have plus we've
organized the world in a relatively what
would you call it um oversimplified
Manner and that means we don't have to
think and that we're on the side of
virtue so you know that's pretty
convenient as well let's talk about the
political landscape then now so that
that that takes us to your to your other
major book yeah yeah that's yeah and
actually that's the one that I that you
know was recently published that's
that's within the last few months as
opposed to 30 years ago right right
that's the two that's the two morali
well well start why don't you why don't
you lay that out first lay out your
thesis and then we'll discuss that in
some more detail and and and jump in
when I overstate this or or go on too
long um so
um I um I do think that moral psychology
is a very helpful lens and invaluable
lens for understanding our political
differences um so
um let's start with motivation when when
you know the the fundamental
motivational distinction for people for
humans is or for any for any animals
approach and avoidance very simply pain
pleasure we approach the good we want to
avoid the bad okay um I am um I actually
ended up using these two ways I first
have to talk a little bit about morality
and and my my understanding of the moral
map a little to to move on to politics
but have have have okay so um um if you
think about Approach at avoidance I I
sort of make a distinction IM morality
between two kinds of morality one is
prescriptive and one is prescriptive
prescriptive is based in avoidance these
are the things we shouldn't do you
shouldn't lie you shouldn't steal you
shouldn't cheat right we all know that
right is that the same
as that's proscriptive morality well
conscious is sort of a is is a sort of a
internal mechanism that allows us to
know the rules and the norms and and
pushes us in the right direction yes but
proscriptive morality is about not doing
the wrong thing it's it's based in
inhibition constraint and so forth
prescripted morality is doing the right
thing it's a difference between not
harming and helping right that's and and
our default moralities based on
interpersonal interactions who we're
interacting with don't harm IE don't
steal don't lie don't cheat and help
right be kind respect others you know
help
right now that difference and by the way
motivationally they're they're not not
harming and helping are not the same
thing they're not just opposite sides of
the same coin they're opposite in many
ways the child who doesn't you know is
told not to take somebody else's toys
and doesn't take the toys isn't
necessarily good at sharing his or her
own right so so the prescriptive and the
prescrip are really quite different and
in fact children learn Pro gift morality
the do not much more readily quicker
than more quickly than the the does okay
in M i' I've mapped the mor moral domain
based on that and I'm not going to go
through the personal and interpersonal
domain what I want to move to is the
group domain the so group-based
moralities that are proscriptive or
prescriptive proscriptive morality the
Shand for that is protect protect from
harm okay the morality of protecting
from harm versus providing for wellbe
okay instead of proscriptive and
prescriptive they're very wordy words
right so um
let's think about morality as rules and
and and Norms that facilitate group
living in part they're based on
protecting from harm the group
protecting the group from harm in this
case and providing for the group those
are the two basic um tasks for group
living right defending and and and and
and
providing and when I've looked at this
the the these two moralities um which by
the way I should also argue
motivationally what is
the what is the most difficult part of
do not if your tempt Temptation has to
be inhibited in the case of the
proscriptive or the
protect the enemy of prescript morality
the providing is not having to Tamp
something down it's not Temptation it's
apathy it's not caring right um so what
I've what I what I what I uh have if you
look at liberals and conservatives they
don't differ in terms of how much they
think you should be helping or or they
may say you should help different people
but you know both groups believe you
shouldn't harm and you shouldn't steal
and lie and cheat and you should help
your neighbor and you should be kind and
respect other people where you start
seeing huge differences is the
group-based morality which um in the
case of a proscriptive group Gates
morality the protect protecting the
group looks like social order you what
people are after is social order
stability and security of the group and
in the case of um a more of a
prescriptive it looks like social
justice providing for the group so
everybody is is cared for a shared
communal responsibility so we have this
social order and social justice which
are quite different but it turns out
those are not correlated they're
negatively correlated every other area
of um
morality uh protecting and and and
providing are highly correlated okay so
I want to move to this how did you how
did you determine that they weren't
correlated well because we took large
samples of of of self-described uh
liberals and conservatives okay and you
can see what they they support for these
various um beliefs belief social order
we have there are con constructs that
underly that and we you know have I mean
unfor in the book we talk about all the
confirming fact all the all the
statistics but
what what's important for me to go back
for one moment
is I actually believe that both liberal
liberalism and conservatism are morally
based now I'm on the left so um but I
believe very strongly that liberals and
conservatives have to work together to
preserve our system I do believe said
why you said why in some sense right
because you need order and you need
provision you need order and in in many
ways um you cannot you we're not going
to preserve a democracy with just half
the country you know opting for it right
I mean if you look at any presidential
election about half the the country
votes Democrat and half a republican now
I do want to put a disclaimer here you
know I do think that the people that
wield these ideologies are not
necessarily moral and I want to say that
you know
M if you are a magga conservative where
the core of your political belief now is
based in a a big lie I'm not opting for
I'm not saying that these are moral I I
I'm already precluding moral morality
there okay but I think there are huge
numbers of conservatives in our country
that um and your country as well right
are you Canadian correct no I'm Canadian
Canadian right use lots of of
conservatives that I disagree with
probably in terms of policy but I'd be
happy to sit down and talk about it we'd
find out there are lots of things that
we' agree about okay um we'd find out
that we' both care about family who care
about Community I you know Li Chene is a
great example of this I everybody I know
on the left says I'd be happy to sit
down with li keni she has Integrity I
don't agree with her about any policy
but she has proven that she is a person
that's moral okay so I want to take I I
do want to say I I'm not talking about
the Maga conservatives right now um I
um we only have to go to the global
party system Global party survey of 20
International um with 2,000 experts on
parties at elections who now have
claimed that our Republican party in in
the US is an alt-right party it is no
longer considered a mainstream
Republican party the Democrats are
considered a mainstream Liberal Party um
so you know we're now talking about a
party that isn't even really a
mainstream conservative party so I but
let's put all of that aside all right um
there is a reason to believe that
um half the half the world half the US
half a Canadian probably are tend
towards a
conservative half tend toward a liberal
these are not I don't believe as Hibbing
and his colleagues do that the that
politics is inherited I do think there
are some temperamental differences early
on that can lead people to One Direction
or another you know all the literature
on threat sensitivity for conservatives
that's threat we talk about that as if
that's necessarily a bad thing that's
not necessarily bad somebody has to be
sort of alert for threat right we know
when you look at um ey tracking for
example studies conservatives are more
likely to look at the negative Etc
Liberals are more likely to look at the
positive or at least don't differentiate
Liberals are more uh the
psychological um attribute that defines
liberals is openness so you have
openness versus a sensitivity to threat
um
these do lead to very different kinds of
policies and concerns okay there's no
question uh unfortunately you know I
think a lot of social order could could
in fact if you have an interest in
social order you could actually believe
in working towards greater equality
which basically is um really uh would
help social order a great deal but in
fact what most conservative moved
towards in in in instead are abortion
social issues ises abortion and uh
samesex marriage and you know doctor
assisted suicide and prohibitions these
are in based on constraint and they are
based on prohibition that's exactly
right which is prescriptive um yeah I'm
sorry so go yes well so so that well
that's I I want to make sure that I'm
I've got the argument exactly right here
and so let me lay out what you said and
tell me if I've got it correct the best
evidence that I know of for
distinguishing between conservatives and
liberals is temperamental right the
liberal types the progressive types are
higher in openness and lower in
conscientiousness especially orderliness
right and then the conservatives are the
reverse of that low in openness and high
in conscientiousness especially
orderliness and so they see less
possibility in potential compared to the
Liberals which is why the Liberals tend
to be open border types because they see
beyond the constraints something
like potential that can be creatively
engaged with whereas the conservatives
are more likely to think no that's a
place where all hell can break loose and
the problem is well the problem is
they're both right because what's beyond
you can be very promising and engaging
and what's beyond you can do you in so
well yeah well let's think about what
what would be the attributes that that
you know conservative would be looking
for strength and power
okay you're talking about threat you
know trying to to protect protect from
the group right strength and power um
socially defined roles so everybody
knows what where they fit you know for
stability uh tradition is looked at and
culture you know as as markers um to uh
fight self-interest etc etc um conser
liberalism doesn't really doesn't that's
not what liberalism is about at all
liberalism is about equality greater
equality for groups you know
providing resources for f for for groups
very different kinds of Interest
here liberalism wants regulation
liberals want regulation in the economic
domain right we want people to have to
we we believe in sort of entitlements
that help people you know with Social
Security and and and Welfare if you need
food and um you know believe in great
trying to establish greater equality
right right that's the economic domain
conservatives actually really more are
more interested in
unfettered um capitalism right UNF the
unfettered econ economy they want
autonomy in the economic domain
conservatives given the interest in
socially defined roles culture tradition
and so forth they focus
on Norm adherence strong Norm adherence
Norm adherence and and strict roles
really is a social domain they want
um regulation around things like
abortion and and same-sex marriage and
things of this
sort and and they want and they want aut
and they want autonomy you know was we
have policies that are completely Mirror
Image one group wants regulation in
economics liberals and the other wants
autonomy there and conservatives want
regulation in Social domain and liberals
want autonomy there so you get this
crazy thing which is why people have
always said why is it that conservatives
really you know they want to be so
strict about abortion but you know don't
touch the economy well of course it's
not their domain it's you see it's not
where the morality the morality doesn't
touch that for them that's it's not a
relevant domain so okay so let me ask
you well that's okay that's okay let me
ask you this um I'll put a good word in
for the conservatives um I know I know
you have been doing that as well with
regards to the necessity of Maintenance
of social order but there's also another
difference that seems to me striking and
I don't think the conservatives are very
good at playing this up the reason that
the conservatives with Integrity want
autonomy in economic matters is so that
individuals rather than the state can
bear the responsibility for
provision right well why is but why is
that okay I understand the argument but
there why is that better people here's
the thing the conservative Mantra is
equal opportunity equal opportunity I
get so very tired of hearing that
because you never have equal opportunity
if people are not starting at the same
place right what's equal opportunity if
somebody has a lot of money they've
inherited from their parents and
somebody has nothing you say's equal
opportunity there's not it's like
running a race with some people starting
you know a lap ahead you know um so even
this notion of individuals should be
responsible it's not that liberals don't
think that it matter not just individual
it's not just individual don't believe
that that I I that I mean you're right
people are also responsible but you know
you it's a I love you know the the the
notion that picking people up by their
own bootstraps and how important that is
and you go back to Martin Luther King
and he says well you know some people
don't even have boots you know it's
important to remember that we just you
know we heard we start in very different
places based on social policies in the
past right so
um it's not as if people who work hard
shouldn't also do well it's that lots of
people who work very hard still can't
get ahead so it you know it this notion
of individuals should be
responsible for those who can make it
without the help great but you want I
think I believe in communal you know
sharing and communal sharing communal
responsibility I believe in that you
know maybe that's that is a liberal
belief that it's not each person for him
or herself and you make her to you bra
or you break it's that we have a
responsibility to each other we're in
this game together we go around once in
life you know help each other and that
includes having a system government
right that's that's what we got helping
those who need it I you know and I don't
think that's inconsistent with people
also working hard
right this is what I this is what I
would recommend for for the time being I
think we should continue this discussion
of the political on The Daily wire plus
side no I'm happy to do that yeah let's
do that let's do that and so so that's
that's a that's a reasonable we've we've
we covered a lot of material that's a
reasonable place to draw this part of
the of the conversation to an end for
everybody watching and
listening thank thank you for your time
and attention first of all on the
YouTube
side yeah I didn't realiz it was already
10 to six thank you yeah well there we
go that's the that's the consequence of
a of a of an engrossing conversation
okay so for everybody watching on
YouTube thank you very much for your
time and attention I'm going to continue
this conversation behind the dailywire
plus platform paywall and so if you want
to join us there please do and we'll
hash out some more of our discussion
with regards to conservatism and
liberalism
um thank you very
much Dr janof yeah is it sorry yanof
bman Jan no it is J janof Bowman Ron
janof okay yes okay uh and and uh yeah
thank you very much for walking me
through your your thoughts on shattered
assumptions and your your political
ideas we're going to continue that and
uh thank you to the film crew here in
Scottsdale for making this possible and
to the Daily wire plus people for
putting this all together and feel free
everyone join us yeah yeah and and the
film crew here yes right right so thank
you and we'll take five and we'll
reestablish contact on The Daily wire
plus side all right bye everybody yep
yep
[Music]